Assessing the Viability of Machine Learning in
Casting Defect Detection: A Comprehensive
Analysis of Machine Learning Models
1st Arham Siddiqui
Santa Clara High School
Santa Clara, California
arham.siddiqui61@gmail.com
Abstract—Machine learning is the subfield of Artificial In-
telligence in which a machine makes predictions from data.
Depending on the type of data provided, algorithms under these
categories will vary in accuracy and efficiency when applied.
Casting is a manufacturing process where liquid material is
poured into a mold containing a hollow cavity of the desired
shape. This liquid material later solidifies in the shape of the
mold. However, in the molding and casting industry, defects
in the casting material such as blow holes, pinholes, burr,
shrinkage defects, mold material defects, pouring metal defects,
and metallurgical defects call for a manual, time consuming, and
inaccurate quality inspection process. In this paper, we show
that the application of machine learning in the molding and
casting industry can serve to be an accurate, more cost effective,
and timely alternative to the current quality inspection process.
Multiple machine learning methods are applied, evaluated, and
analyzed thoroughly to reach a conclusive statement. Our results
are then compared to those of recent advancements in surface
defect detection.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Manufacturing products in the industrial process inevitably
leads to defects. Major reasons for the cause of these de-
fects include faulty design and machine production equip-
ment, unfavorable working conditions, and fragile material.
If left untreated, manufacturing defects can induce a spiral
of several problems in the workplace: increased production
cost, shortened service life of products, extensive consumption
of resources. Manual solutions to this problem are costly,
inaccurate, and time-insensitive. Alternatively, automatic, or
machine-based solutions, have proved to be superior in these
aspects of detecting defective products [8].
Due to the pronounced necessity for automated detection
systems, there has been extensive research conducted around
this field. For the simplicity of this paper and to better direct
the goals of this research, we will be taking a look at a
specific industrial manufacturing process which is prone to
defects: molding and casting. Casting is a manufacturing
process where liquid material is poured into a mold containing
a hollow cavity of the desired shape. This liquid material later
solidifies into the shape of the mold. Defects in this industry
most commonly include imperfections in the casting material,
more specifically blow holes, pinholes, burr, shrinkage defects,
mold material defects, pouring metal defects, and metallurgical
defects [2].
The defects in casting material previously mentioned are
present on the surface area of the cast. The technology
used to detect defects in this area can be further defined
as the technology used to detect spots, pits, scratches, and
color differences on a product’s surface. As for detecting
these imperfections, there are various automated procedures
currently in place. These include deep learning [7], magnetic
powder [4], eddy current testing [3], ultrasonic testing [6], and
machine vision [5] detection methods [8].
The contributions of this paper include: Testing and ana-
lyzing common machine learning models to identify the most
accurate model in surface imperfection detection, calibrating
a deep learning model to give us the best performance when
detecting defects on casting material, evaluating the perfor-
mance of this deep learning model to current novel detection
processes in regards to detection accuracy, understanding how
our adjustments to the deep learning model increased the
accuracy of the detection, and finding a correlation between
the adjustments made and the model’s performance.
This paper is organized as the following: In the first section,
issues caused by casting imperfections are established and
Deep Learning defect detection is introduced. In the second
section, our methods and procedures are demonstrated and
explored. In the third section, our results are presented and
evaluation metrics are explained. In the fourth section, these
results are thoroughly analyzed. The last section concludes our
findings.
II. M ETHODS
Dataset
The data we used was obtained from kaggle.com [2]:
Casting Product Image Data For Quality Inspection. The
dataset contains 7,348 300x300x3 images of defective and
non-defective casting material. After importing the dataset
to a local notebook, we converted all the images from rgb
to grayscale and shuffled the images in both the training
and testing alongside their corresponding labels to avoid any
similarity bias whatsoever.
Models
The first model we applied the data to was Logistic Re-
gression. To do so, we first flattened all the images and fit the
data to the model with a max iteration of 200. Additionally, we
applied the flattened data to the Random Forest Classifier. Both
of these models are provided by the scikit-learn package. We
evaluated the performance of both of these models by using a
confusion matrix.
Since image classification is a problem of linear topology,
we applied the non-flattened data to a Sequential model
provided by the tensorflow package. Initially, we added 3 con-
volutional and maxpool layers with a Leaky Relu activation.
This architecture can be seen in Fig 1.
Fig. 1.
An additional convolutional and maxpool layer was added,
with a Leaky Relu activation, to assess the resulting accuracy.
Both Sequential models were compiled with the Adam opti-
mizer along with Binary Crossentropy for the loss and were
run for 10 epochs. The architecture for the 4 layer model can
be seen in Fig 2.
Fig. 2.
III. R ESULTS
Evaluation Metrics
To compare the performance of the Logistic Regression
and RFC models, we used the confusion matrix (prediction
vs actual), AUC plot (area under ROC plot (plots TPR vs.
FPR at different classification thresholds [1])), and recall score
(TP/TP+FN).
To compare the performance of the Sequential Architec-
tures, we visualized the accuracy and loss scores over epochs
and plotted respective confusion matrices for the validation
accuracy.
Results
The Logistic Regression model had an AUC score of 89.1%
and a recall of 82.4%. This model performed decently though
all the data given was flattened. The confusion matrix for this
model is shown in Fig 3 and the AUC score is visualized in
Fig 4.
Fig. 3.
Fig. 4.
The Random Forest Classifier had an AUC score of 98.2%
and a recall of 96.6%. This model performed extremely well
due to the complexity of the numerous trees and the amount of
verification behind each prediction. The confusion matrix for
this model is shown in Fig 5 and the AUC score is visualized
in Fig 6.
Fig. 5.
Fig. 6.
The 3 layered Sequential CNN had an accuracy of 79.0%.
There is a steep decrease in loss during epochs 0-4 after which
the model stabilizes. The confusion matrix of this model is
shown in Fig 7. The accuracy and loss plots are visualized in
Fig 8.
Fig. 7.
Fig. 8.
The 4 layered Sequential CNN had an accuracy of 82.5%.
The loss curve exhibits stabilization after epoch 5-6. The
confusion matrix of this model is shown in Fig 9. The accuracy
and loss plots are visualized in Fig 10.
Fig. 9.
Fig. 10.
IV. A NALYSIS
The evaluation of these four methods will be broken down
into a comparison between the Logistic Regression and Ran-
dom Forest Classifier, both Sequential architectures, and a final
comparison between all 4 proposed methods.
Logistic Regression vs Random Forest Classifier
Analyzing the AUC scores of the Logistic Regression model
and the RFC, 89.1% and 98.2% respectively, the difference of
9.1% between these scores indicates an apparent superiority
of the RFC over the Logistic Regression model regarding
the ability of the model to distinguish between positive and
negative classes in the testing data. With a difference of 14.2%
in the recall score, the RFC definitively outclasses the Logistic
Regression model in its ability to repeatedly output positive
predictions. As we have both confusion matrices visualized for
these models, we can delve further into performance analysis
by utilizing the precision score. As precision is calculated by
dividing the number of True Positive values by the total of
the True Positives and False Positives, we must define these
terms. Defective cases will be classified as positive while non-
defective cases will be classified as negative. Accordingly, the
precision score for the Logistic Regression model is 93.5%
and for the Random Forest Classifier it is 99.1%. This metric
shows us that there is a far lower margin of error regarding
positive classifications in the Random Forest Classifier as
opposed to the Logistic Regression model. Overall, the RFC
proved superiority over the Logistic Regression model after
evaluating the AUC, recall, and precision metrics.
Sequential Architectures
Analyzing the accuracy scores of both architectures, with
the 3 layer having 79.0% and the 4 layer having 82.5%, it
can be concluded that the 4 layer architecture does perform
better. Evaluating the precision scores, which are calculated
from the respective visualized confusion matrices, the 3 layer
model has 84.4% precision level while the 4 layer has 81.4%.
This strikes interest as the higher accuracy in the 4 layer
model doesn’t translate to superior precision score over that
of the 3 layer model. This may be because precision is not
affected by the amount of layers in the architecture. This
suggests that the 4 layer model may have a higher tendency to
produce false positives or negatives compared to the 3 layer
model. On the other hand, the 4 layer model has about a
15% increase in specificity, which regards the amount of true
negative predictions. This disparity is more significant than the
mere 3% variation between the recall score of the two models.
Therefore, greater emphasis should be placed on this metric
when evaluating overall model performance. Overall, adding
an additional layer to the 3 layered Sequential CNN proved
beneficial as there was increase in accuracy and specificity,
whereas a slight deterioration in precision level. The decreased
precision level may have been a result of increased complexity
in the model, leading to a lack of generalization and/or feature
extraction from the data.
All 4
Comparing the accuracy scores of all 4 proposed models,
the RFC and Logistic Regression models both outperformed
the Sequential architectures. These “simple” models likely
outperformed the Sequential models because they were better
suited for the task at hand, specifically the binary classification
of this particular dataset. The size of the dataset plays a
role in the accuracy of the Sequential models as they are
typically better suited for larger datasets to generate more
accurate generalizations. Additionally, an increase in accuracy
was observed from the 3 layer to 4 layer model, indicating a
potential correlation between the number of model parameters
and the resulting accuracy score.
V. C ONCLUSION
It can be concluded that the Random Forest Classifier
outperformed all other proposed methods in this study. This
model’s ensemble architecture and robustness to outliers and
noise makes it ideal for this case of binary classification.
Based on the accuracy scores observed and our knowledge
of deep learning models, we can conclude that the Sequential
architectures proposed would need to be increased in size (total
parameters) and applied to a larger dataset to rival the accuracy
shown by the RFC.
On this note, the question arises why a larger dataset
wasn’t applied to this case. Rotational data augmentation was
performed to this data set to quadruple the amount of data
values available for training and testing. Unfortunately, the
augmented data was unable to be utilized due to insufficient
memory on the local computing device responsible for training
and testing the models. To combat this issue, data streaming
by the use of generators was explored but was unsuccessful
in addressing the memory limitations. Regardless, we can
hypothesize an increase in the Sequential models’ accuracy
if they were to be applied on the augmented dataset if more
layers were added to their architecture.
The 98.2% AUC score of the RFC is sufficient for this case.
The Random Forest Classifier outperforms all other machine
learning models tested on an artificial and real defect dataset
proposed by Yin et al, where amplitude, width, angle, and
symmetry were computed to extract features from Lissajous
figures [3]. Additionally, there is minimal cost associated
with a machine learning implementation in a real life set-
ting: camera, a computing device and an accompanying alert
system. These costs outweigh the alternative consequences of
undetected casting defects or hiring human labor for this cause.
REFERENCES
[1] “Classification: Roc Curve and AUC&nbsp; —&nbsp;
Machine Learning&nbsp; —&nbsp; Google for Develop-
ers.” Google, developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-
course/classification/roc-and-auc. Accessed 14 July 2023.
[2] Dabhi, Ravirajsinh. “Casting Product Image Data for Quality Inspec-
tion.” Kaggle, 2 July 2020, www.kaggle.com/datasets/ravirajsinh45/real-
life-industrial-dataset-of-casting-product.
[3] D’Angelo, Gianni et al. “Fast Eddy Current Testing Defect Classification
Using Lissajous Figures.” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
Measurement 67 (2018): 821-830.
[4] Influence of Si/Cr Ratio on Flake Morphology and Magnetic Properties
of Fe-Si-Al-Cr Particles. Zhang, N., +, LMAG 2016 3706005
[5] Jing, Yang & Li, Shaobo & Gao, Zong & Wang, Zheng & Liu, Wei.
(2018). Real-Time Recognition Method for 0.8 cm Darning Needles
and KR22 Bearings Based on Convolution Neural Networks and Data
Increase. Applied Sciences. 8. 1856-1873. 10.3390/app8101857.
[6] Kusano, Masahiro et al. “Mid-infrared pulsed laser ultrasonic testing for
carbon fiber reinforced plastics.” Ultrasonics vol. 84 (2018): 310-318.
doi:10.1016/j.ultras.2017.11.015
[7] Y . Li, W. Zhao and J. Pan, ”Deformable Patterned Fabric Defect Detec-
tion With Fisher Criterion-Based Deep Learning,” in IEEE Transactions
on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1256-1264,
April 2017, doi: 10.1109/TASE.2016.2520955.
[8] Yang, J.; Li, S.; Wang, Z.; Dong, H.; Wang, J.; Tang, S. Us-
ing Deep Learning to Detect Defects in Manufacturing: A Compre-
hensive Survey and Current Challenges. Materials 2020, 13, 5755.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ma13245755
[9] Yin L, Ye B, Zhang Z, Tao Y , Xu H, Salas Avila JR, Yin W, A novel
feature extraction method of eddy current testing for defect detection
based on machine learning, NDT and E International (2019), doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ndteint.2019.04.005.