A Comparative Analysis of Ensemble and
Individual Machine Learning Architectures for
Mitigating Phishing Attack Risks
1st Arham Siddiqui
Santa Clara High School
Santa Clara, California
arham.siddiqui61@gmail.com
Abstract—Phishing attacks are a pervasive threat to cyber-
security, leaving those with minimal digital literacy susceptible
to hacking or identity theft. Such attacks generally come in
the form of emails, disguised as potential opportunities for the
unsuspecting user, asking for the user to follow a link. These
emails mimic or pose as authentic companies/organizations by
the use of character substitution, special characters, or extensive
characters in their domain name. This issue prompts the develop-
ment of effective detection mechanisms. In this research paper, we
present a comparative analysis of the viability of three machine
learning models, namely K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Random
Forest Classifier (RFC), and an Ensemble model comprised of
a Decision Tree, SVC, and RFC for detecting phishing attacks.
We utilized an extensive dataset of 30 features with 11,055 data
points each. Accuracy, precision, recall, and f1 scores were the
metrics used to evaluate performance for the models used. The
primary objective of this study is to determine which model
offers the most effective performance in detecting such attacks,
and analyze ways to optimize the efficiency of said method.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Phishing attacks are a cybersecurity threat that come in
the form of emails posing as an authentic and trustable
entity/organization. Fundamentally deceptive, these attacks are
created to trick victims into thinking they have received a
potential opportunity, which ultimately leads them to provide
personal information that they would only give to trusted
sites. Repercussions of such attacks include “identity theft,
credit card fraud, ransomware attacks, data breaches, and huge
financial losses for individuals and corporations” [10].
There are multiple types of phishing attacks, namely spear
phishing, clone phishing, link manipulation, website forgery,
covert redirect, and voice phishing [11]. This study focuses
on combating a composition of spear phishing, link manip-
ulation, and website forgery, where a hacker sends a decep-
tive/manipulated link to a user to redirect them to a forged
website.
II. B ACKGROUND RESEARCH
Having a system in place that can effectively detect and alert
users of phishing attacks is patently beneficial to all users with
an email address. This technology would be especially useful
to those with a lack of digital literacy, as they are the most
susceptible to such attacks.
Anti-phishing toolbars
Current solutions to this issue prompt users to be more
aware of phishing attacks and to download an anti-phishing
toolbar [2]. Anti-phishing toolbars work by comparing web-
sites the user visits to known phishing sites in their database.
An obvious flaw with this approach is the occurrence of a
website that doesn’t fall in the database of this tool. This
would render this method useless, leaving the victim prone
to losing personal information.
Blacklisted Domains
Similar to the anti-phishing toolbar, a blacklist approach to
phishing sites is suggested in [3], where lexical features from
a suspicious domain are compared to those of blacklisted ones.
Based on this comparison, a conclusion is drawn as to whether
the site is phishing or not. The issue with this approach is
the fact that the list of blacklisted domains, though extensive,
will become outdated if not updated regularly. Additionally, if
hackers acquire such a database, workaround domains can be
created and widespread, ultimately having an adverse effect
on this method. This blacklist approach proves an f1 score of
0.84, which we aim to surpass.
III. M ETHODS
Dataset
We obtained our dataset from the UCI Machine Learning
Repository [7] which includes 30 features with 11,055 data
points each. The feature explanation document can be viewed
here [8]. Some of these features include “URL Length”, “pop-
UpWindow”, and “double slash redirecting”. Each feature has
one of three numeric values: 0 - suspicious, 1 - legitimate, or
-1 - phishing. These values were initially a different format so
a unicode decoding function had to be applied on the entire
dataset to get the feature values in numerical format. The label
distribution of a random sample of 500 data points of the
example features named above are visualized in Fig 1.
Fig. 1.
As seen in the visualizations, not all features have the 0
numerical value, but all have 1 and -1. The distribution of the
labels is visualized in Fig 2.
Fig. 2.
We utilized sklearn’s train test split function to issue a 75%
/ 25% split between the training and testing data respectively.
This resulted in the training features having: 8291 rows x 30
columns, testing features: 2764 rows x 30 columns, training
labels: 8291 rows x 1 column, testing labels: 2764 rows x 1
column.
Models
Our approach started by the implementation of the KNN, or
K-Nearest-Neighbors model. We started off with K values of
1 and 2, or 1 and 2 neighbors. These models were trained and
tested on the UCI dataset. In order to improve accuracy for
this model, we decided to fine tune the hyperparameters for
this model, namely the n neighbors, weights, and algorithm
parameters. Additionally, we created a python script to gen-
erate KNN models from 1-97 neighbors to find the optimal
amount of neighbors for this model.
The next model tested was the RFC, or Random Forest
Classifier. Just as we did with the KNN, we started with a fixed
amount of estimators: 10. To further improve the accuracy of
the RFC in this setting, we altered and utilized the same python
script to generate RFC models from 1-97 estimators to find the
optimal estimators for this model. The hyperparameters tuned
for this model were n estimators, criterion, and max features.
The next method we used was an ensemble model. An
ensemble model is a way to combine multiple models in a
single prediction process for an overall higher accuracy. As
a single estimator/model may be non-optimal for the specific
type of classification and dataset used in this case, using an
ensemble eliminates this issue. The ensemble we created was
composed of 3 models: A decision tree, SVC, and an RFC.
The makeup for this ensemble was purposeful. A decision
tree is basic yet effective at classification while an SVC is
great for separating complex data. The RFC, an ensemble
of decision trees, is extremely useful for binary classification
as well. The diversity of these models serves beneficial for
the ensemble as a whole as the benefits of each are factored
into the overall prediction, whereas cons that exist among the
individual models will be ruled out as a collective prediction.
The ensemble was formed by creating each of the 3 models
separately, then employing a voting classifier and passing in
all the models as parameters. The default voting parameter of
“hard” was set to use the predicted class labels for majority
rule voting.
IV. R ESULTS
It is important to clearly define what results we are looking
for in an ideal model. We want to find the model with the
highest prediction accuracy, but precision, recall, and f1 scores
will also be taken into account to follow correlations/explain
the workings of the models.
KNN
For the initial KNN (neighbors 1-2) the confusion matrices
are shown in Fig 3.
Fig. 3.
A visualization of the python script to evaluate performance
metrics over neighbors can be seen in Fig 4.
Fig. 4.
Analyzing this chart, there seems to be a noticeable decrease
in all metrics after 10 neighbors, meaning a larger number of
neighbors doesn’t affect accuracy and other metrics positively
for the KNN. Since 10 neighbors was the optimal amount for
the recall, precision, and f1 scores, we kept this parameter
fixed when tuning the others. The tuning of the remaining
parameters is shown in Fig 5.
Fig. 5.
RFC
The confusion matrix for the initial RFC is shown in Fig 6.
Fig. 6.
A visualization of the python script to evaluate performance
metrics over estimators can be seen in Fig 7.
Contrary to the KNN, the more estimators available in the
RFC, the higher its performance metrics seem to become. In
fact, 100 estimators was collectively the optimal number of
Fig. 7.
estimators for the recall, precision, and f1 scores. Hyperpa-
rameter tuning was therefore done on a base RFC with 100
estimators. The tuning of these parameters is shown in Fig 8.
Fig. 8.
There wasn’t much variation in accuracy scores from the
hyper parameter tuning, meaning that the amount of estimators
was the main differentiating factor regarding accuracy. This
is understandable as the RFC relies on a conglomerate of
decision trees/estimators to create predictions, so the more
points of predictions, the more the overall accuracy will
increase.
Ensemble
The confusion matrix for the base ensemble model is shown
in Fig 9.
Fig. 9.
The scores for the individual models are shown in Fig 10
along with a visualization of the accuracy distributions in Fig
11.
Fig. 10.
Fig. 11.
Although the RFC performed highest, the ensemble per-
formed relatively close with a difference of only 0.001 between
the accuracy scores. Additionally, no hyperparameter tuning
– such as the number of models, the type of aggregation,
or the weights assigned to the models – was performed to
the ensemble or the Decision Tree and SVC comprising it.
Overall, the ensemble ended up with an accuracy lower than
all the models comprising it.
V. C ONCLUSION
The Random Forest Classifier with 100 estimators, a
max features value of “sqrt”, and a criterion value of “en-
tropy” performed the best out of all models tested, with
an accuracy score of 97.11%. This accuracy was achieved
after hyperparameter tuning was performed on the base RFC.
Though the ensemble didn’t perform better than the tuned RFC
with a score of 96.71%, it still achieved a higher accuracy
score than the tuned KNN which had 95.81%. The ensemble
may have performed worse than the models comprising it
because when faced with conflicting predictions, it may in-
accurately reconcile these conflicts, leading to lower accuracy.
We believe an ensemble model could definitely outdo the RFC
if tuned properly. To reiterate, the ensemble model discussed in
this study was not tuned. Based on the accuracy improvements
from the KNN and RFC post-tuning, we can infer that an
increase of around 1-2% would be evident if the ensemble
were to be tuned optimally, boosting its accuracy score over
the RFC in this case. Next steps for this research include fine
tuning the discussed ensemble model, generating ensembles
with a different model makeup and evaluating their results, and
creating a plugin/application to apply this model to directly
scan emails/sites for phishing attacks.
REFERENCES
[1] “Creating multiple subplots using plt.subplots
— Matplotlib 3.7.2 documentation.” Matplotlib,
https://matplotlib.org/stable/gallery/subplots axes and figures/subplots demo.html.
[2] “8 Simple Measures For Phishing Attack Pre-
vention - PhishProtection.com.” Phish Protection,
https://www.phishprotection.com/content/phishing-prevention/phishing-
attack-prevention.
[3] Hong, J., Kim, T., Liu, J., Park, N., Kim, SW. (2020). Phishing URL
Detection with Lexical Features and Blacklisted Domains. In: Jajodia,
S., Cybenko, G., Subrahmanian, V ., Swarup, V ., Wang, C., Wellman,
M. (eds) Adaptive Autonomous Secure Cyber Systems. Springer, Cham.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-33432-1 12
[4] Parekh, Shivani. “Ensemble model : Data Visualization — by
Shivani Parekh — Analytics Vidhya.” Medium, 9 October
2020, https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/ensemble-model-data-
visualization-2f4cb06859c1.
[5] Parekh, Shivani. “Ensemble Modelling: How it is performed in
Python- A quick guide — Analytics Vidhya.” Medium, 26 Au-
gust 2020, https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/ensemble-modelling-in-
a-simple-way-386b6cbaf913.
[6] “Phishing Defense by Design.” Coforge,
https://www.coforge.com/resource-library/white-papers/phishing-
defense-design.
[7] “Phishing Websites.” UCI Machine Learning Repository, 25 March
2015, https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/327/phishing+websites.
[8] Phishing Websites Features, https://eprints.hud.ac.uk/id/eprint/24330/6/MohammadPhishing14July2015.pdf.
[9] “Plot Multiple lines in Matplotlib.” GeeksforGeeks, 25 November 2020,
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/plot-multiple-lines-in-matplotlib/.
[10] “What is a phishing attack?” IBM,
https://www.ibm.com/topics/phishing.
[11] “What is a Phishing attack? — mlytics.” Mlytics Learning Center,
https://learning.mlytics.com/cyber-attacks/what-is-a-phishing-attack/.